FAQ for upgrading R (response to CVE-2024-27322) (#769)
RSE-Sheffield/RSE-Sheffield.github.io: _posts/2024-06-05-faqs-for-upgrading-r.md

The most concerning aspects of this exploit have been fixed in the newest version of R (version 4.4.0 at the time of writing) and we strongly recommend that all R users at the University of Sheffield upgrade their R version immediately. However, it is important to note that there will continue to be a risk when using RDS or RDX files from untrusted sources, regardless of whether you are using version 4.4.0. As always, members of the University of Sheffield should use their best judgement when running code from sources outside of the University.

## YoYo and Managed Desktop users

> The upgrade to R 4.4.0 will happen automatically and you will not need to take any further action to update R itself. You will need to recreate your R package library for R 4.4.0 - reinstalling any R packages that you currently need/use.

Reviewer: Should instructions on upgrading packages be included?

I would typically run...

```
update.packages()
```

...in the new R version after installation, but I have hooks setup under Arch to rebuild packages after an update of R.

Author: How safe is `update.packages()`?  Any typical footguns?

Reviewer: Occasionally I've encountered the odd package that will fail to compile (under Linux).

I know for Debian based systems there are builds for ["_many packages on CRAN and Bioconductor_"](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/linux/debian/) but can't speak to those nor the situation under OSX (I suspect they are built from source too, I do have a Macbook but haven't had recourse to use R on it much).

Author: Added brief mention of `update.packages()`

1. Test your workflows with R 4.4.0 
1. Delete your older version(s) of R. 
   1. To do this, open your file explorer and navigate to where your base R files are located. Use the file path from step 4 to guide you to the files if they are not obvious.  ![Picking old versions to delete](/assets/images/2024-06-05-faqs-for-upgrading-r/upgrading-r-rstudio-r-folder-deletion.png)
   1. Right click on the older version(s) and select _Delete_.  
1. When all the old versions have been deleted, the upgrade task is complete.

## University of Sheffield HPC users

The versions of R centrally installed on Stanage and Bessemer may be older than 4.4.0. Those installations have recently been updated to include a fix for the vulnerability.  

If you're using R via Conda on Bessemer or Stanage, see the *guidance for Conda* below.

## FAQs

### What are RDS and RDX data files for R (.rds, .rdx), and why are they used?

These are binary files used to store R objects such as data frames, lists, functions, and other R data structures. They are commonly used for saving and loading data within the R programming environment.

### Do I have to upgrade to R 4.4.0?

> Upgrading to R version 4.4.0 is mandatory as it addresses recent security vulnerabilities. It's important to remember that even with the latest version there is still a risk with untrusted RDS files.

Reviewer: Perhaps pedantic but "mandatory" is a strong word with specific connotations/implications if what is being advised (upgrading) isn't undertaken. How is failure to comply going to be assessed, if at all, and dealt with?

Author: Given how/where R is used we can't enforce this but strong wording is required to motivate people here given the number/diversity of unmanaged R installations across the researcher community.

### What if my workflow is dependent on an older version of R?

We advise you to start testing your workflow on the new version, documenting any warnings or errors that might arise. You can book a [Code Clinic](https://rse.shef.ac.uk/support/code-clinic/) with the Research Software Engineering (RSE) team, to discuss your specific workflow and concerns in detail and get hands-on assistance with debugging any errors or adapting your code to the new version.

### Can we always trust packages downloaded from CRAN?

While CRAN offers some security measures, using a package from CRAN isn't guaranteed to be entirely-risk free. Always use your best judgement. 

### What's new in R 4.4.0? 

Changes in R version 4.4.0 can be found in [R News Documentation](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/NEWS.R-4.4.0.html). 

### What if I don't use R Studio as my default environment for R?

> We recommend that you read the documentation for your chosen text editor. If you cannot find an appropriate method, then we recommend starting the update process by deleting your older version of your base R files before downloading and installing version 4.4.0. 

Reviewer: R installation is _always_ completely independent of RStudio (even if it can be managed from within) and its probably not the text editor that people need to look at. VSCode won't allow you to do this, nor will Emacs. Its more likely their systems package manager (Debian/Ubuntu would be `apt`; Arch Linux `pacman`; Gentoo `portage`; OSX `homebrew`) that people need to look at and we can't double guess what that would be for everyone. Perhaps pointing people to the generic install instructions on CRAN would be most appropriate.

```suggestion
We recommend that you read the documentation for the package manager of your operating system. If you cannot find an appropriate method, then we recommend reading the FAQ linked from the [The Comprehensive R Archive Network](https://cloud.r-project.org/).
```

Author: Thanks; I haven't made the exact specified change but have added wording of that nature.  Think those FAQs are pretty imposing and keen not to push people towards them too readily.

## General advice

1. Use trusted sources

>     * Use packages from a reputable source with a history of well maintained packages. 

Reviewer: Whilst this is true and good advice my understanding of the issue is that it is serialised R objects `.Rds` / `.Rdx` perhaps worth emphasising that...

```suggestion
    * Use packages from a reputable source with a history of well maintained packages. 
    * Use only serialised (`.Rds` / `.Rdx`) objects from trusted sources, be very wary of such files shared openly on the internet.
```

Author: Good suggestion; ta
